Today I'm interviewing Riner Pope who is
CEO of Maddox which is a new chip
startup. Previously he was doing TPU
architecture and many other things at
Google. This is a very different format
from my usual interviews. This is going
to be a Blackboard lecture we're going
to get up in a second. We in fact built
this whole new studio with specifically
this format in mind. Um and so it's a
pleasure to get to inaugurate it with
you. We're going to be talking about
model architecture, ML infra, many other
things. And um the reason I think it's
an important topic is because once you
actually understand how training and
inference actually work in a cluster as
we'll see a lot of things about why AI
is the way it is why AI architectures
are the way they are why um API prices
are the way they are fundamentally also
how why AI progress is the way it is
start making sense and you need to
understand the details to get there and
you need a blackboard to understand the
details. So Riner thank you so much for
doing this.
>> Yeah very happy to be here. Okay. Uh,
full disclosure, I am a angel investor
in Maddx, but that's unrelated to this
podcast. Um, Reiner, maybe to kick us
off, I'll ask this question. So, we have
a couple of companies like Claude and
Codex and Cursor are offering something
like uh, fast mode where for 6x the
price, they'll give you streamy tokens
at 2.5x the speed. Mechanically, I'm
curious what's going on here. Like, why
is it the case that you can pay more to
get faster latency? And two, could you
keep going? Could you pay 100x more and
somehow get even faster speeds or much
much faster speeds? Um, and three, could
you go the other way? Could you have
something like uh claw code slow mode
where if you are willing to wait for
minutes on end, you could get um even
cheaper prices. So maybe this will help
motivate the kind of analysis that
you'll be doing through the liar.
>> Great. I mean to jump to a little bit to
jump to the conclusion the big effect is
batch size but what we're going to do
now is quantify exactly what that looks
like and what its implications are on
latency and cost. Uh there's going to be
another effect which is um you can call
it speculative decoding or multi-token
prediction. We can maybe come back to
that later but I think the first thing
that we'll talk through is batch size.
So what I'd like to introduce is um sort
of the two principles of analysis.
Firstly we're going to look at a roof
line analysis of how I run a transformer
model on on a cluster of chips. um we'll
take a sort of a let's say a Blackwell
NVL72 uh cluster so a rack of 72 GPUs
um and so the roof line analysis means
we look at uh memory bandwidth and and
compute performance and then the other
side of that is that we're going to look
at just two simple factors of the model
which are the time to operate on the
weights and then the time to operate on
the context the KB cache.
So let's jump in. What we're going to
try and do is we're going to try and
estimate the time that it takes uh to to
run an inference of a certain shape.
Now, we're not perfect here. We can't uh
exactly predict the time. And so,
instead, we're going to approximate. And
so, we're going to say that the time
must be greater than or equal to a
certain quantity.
And so, we're going to consider two
different um aspects. We're going to
look at the time for uh it takes to uh
do the memory fetches uh and then the
time it takes to do the compute.
And it'll turn out that this actually
gives us a very strong predictive power
even with a simple model. So one by one,
what is the time that it takes to do the
compute?
So there are really two things I need to
do in the compute. I need to um multiply
by all of the active parameters um and
then I need to do some work on the
attention. So multiplying by all the
active parameters. I have a certain
batch size that I'm running and then
I've got a number of uh active
parameters in my model
and then um and then I'm just going to
divide this by the compute throughput
which is uh the flops of the chip. So
this is hardware constant.
So this this actually accounts for all
of the compute time for all of the
weight matrix multiplies. Um there's a
little caveat here. we we've sort of
ignored the time to do any of the
attention computation but that in
general can be will be quite small in
comparison to this. So so we'll ignore
this.
>> Maybe I'll just inter from time to time
to ask some very naive questions or to
clarify some uh basic points but just
for the audience you're not serving one
user at a time. The batch refers to the
fact that you're serving many different
users at the same time.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and that's a whole batch.
>> Yeah. So I can motivate the batch at
least a little bit. So um I mean we will
see exactly why batch is such a
favorable optimization but what will
turn out to be the case is that uh if
you do not batch together many users um
the cost and the economics you get is
can be like a thousand times worse than
than if you do batch many two users
together um and and we'll be able to see
that quite explicitly
>> and then uh number of active parameters
this is saying like if I look at for
example a deepseek model uh the deepseek
v3 model has about 30 37 billion active
parameters and
uh 700 billion total parameters. So this
is we're focusing on just the ones that
are active for a single token. Okay, so
we're modeled compute performance. I'm
going to keep writing equals, but in all
of these cases, you can think of this
time as being at least this much and and
maybe there will be some terms we
ignored. Um on the memory side, um what
do we need to do uh with memory? We we
need to fetch um we need to fetch all of
the weights. And so there is some time
to fetch all of the the total number of
parameters not just the active
parameters. Um
so there's wait fetch time and then in
addition uh there's a KV cache fetch
time. So there is um this actually
depends on batch size. Uh so for every
element of the batch we have to fetch uh
an entire context length
worth of tokens and then there's a size
per token. So uh um like bytes
bytes per for for one token. Um and so
this is a model parameter
>> and maybe just back in let's just
explain what the KB cache is real quick.
>> Yeah. So when I do a forward pass uh let
me draw actually a um how the auto
reggressive inference works. So this is
during decode. Um so if I think I have a
bunch of tokens uh of text I'm growing a
tensor because uh ultimately the tokens
are represented as some like tensor of
uh in some embedding dimension and then
in this direction I have the sequence
length.
Um
the work of running a decode is I I have
to run each token through a um uh
through a whole bunch of matrix
multiplies over a bunch of different
layers. Um, and I have I have in general
I'm going to have to do that work over
uh all of these uh tokens.
But then one step of decode is actually
to produce just this one additional
token path here. Yep. And so what I'm
going to do there is I'm going to run a
full forwards pass of uh multiplying by
all of the weight matrices in the entire
model. Um but then I've got this
attention mechanism where this token
sort of it's it's like looking at all of
the past tokens. um in this way and what
is it looking at specifically? It is
looking at some internal representation
that the model has produced of the
tokens and we call that the KB cache. So
this process of attending this this
single token attending to all of the
history of tokens um that's attention.
It is mostly dominated by memory fetches
rather than um than matrix multiplies.
>> Mhm. So we've got the amount of memory
that we're fetching shown over here and
then this is of course just then divided
by the uh memory bandwidth. Um so uh so
the memory
bytes per second.
So in fact this these equations here are
actually enough for us to now some draw
some fit lines. And so the things that
we'd like to look at are sensitivity to
batch and then also um which we'll draw
separately to context links.
So we said that the big big effects you
can get is like some some trade-off in
latency versus uh versus cost um in in
batch size. So so let's draw them out. I
think there's just really two graphs we
want to draw. Um we'll first just draw
um batch size versus uh time here.
So when we look at the shape of this,
we've got a maximum of a sum and then
and then another term. Um so let's look
at these terms one by one and how they
scale uh uh the time for compute and and
memory uh and how they show up. So let's
first look at this compute time. Uh this
is just purely linear linear in batch
size with no um no offset. So it is some
>> curve like this. This is this is t
compute. Um
and then on the memory side we've got
some portion here that uh that is just
this constant that um that is you know
constant in some base offset here which
is the uh weight fetch
weight fetch.
And then finally we have um this term
here which is the KB fetch um which
we're going to draw as as
this is the KB fetch
which is which is linear and bash and so
it looks like that. So the sum of this
plus this maxed with this. So let's at
least first to draw the sum. Um
so the two memory times in in
conjunction end up looking on this
curved slope like this.
>> Mhm.
>> And then we get a um the overall maximum
is I'll draw a little figure here. Is it
the maximum of these two curves? Make
sense? Okay. So so so what does what
does this mean actually? So this is a
latency um plot.
Um
so if I grow my batch size I um I get
initially some not very strong
dependence on batch size and so there's
some lower bound on latency here. Um
latency lower bound
lower bound.
Um so this already partially answers the
question for a given hardware
configuration and then we can talk about
varying hardware configuration but for a
given hardware configuration there is a
lower bound on latency which is simply
the I need to read all of my total
parameters um from uh from memory into
the into the chips and that takes a
certain amount of time. Uh if if I use
all of my memory bandwidth I can't do
any better than that. uh it seems like
the way you've drawn the slopes for
compute time and how the KB grows
>> and what implication the KB has on
memory uh time
>> that as what if this were above or below
or
>> yeah or is that necessarily the case
because if this is always true then as
batch size grows compute always
dominates
>> uh KVN which which suggests that if you
have big enough batch size maybe memory
is never an issue. Yeah, this is really
sensitive to the context length. Um, so
I think we should come back and explore
this. The there will be as you vary the
context length, the KB fetch time will
go up and up and so that'll cause a
transition from uh compute limited to
memory limit.
>> And is there something especially
significant about the slope being
exactly the slope of the um the comput
time?
>> Yeah, whenever we have balance points,
it kind of says that you're getting it
exactly right. Um and so
>> for the particular context length where
the slopes match um that says I am
equally memory bound and computebound
which is a really desirable place to but
suppose it's like this is a very simple
algebra algebra problem but
>> suppose it's you know the optimal is
100k context length
>> and you go to 200k context length does
your MFU go down to like 50% like does
it have a humongous impact on MFU
>> to be like slightly outside of context
length optimal range goldilock zone.
>> That's right. So that is true as modeled
here. Um there's a key point here that
I'm modeling this context length as uh
or I'm modeling the memory fetch as
linear in context length
>> that actually depends on model
architecture. It is true for many of the
or all of the model architectures with
dense attention. Yeah. Um there's a
sparse attention actually scales much
better than that.
>> Got it. And is sparse attention what
everybody uses in practice?
>> I'm pretty excited about sparse
attention. uh it's hard to know what the
labs are using. Deepseek has published a
sparse attention mechanism.
>> I'll just like put a plug in that sparse
attention. Some of the deepseeek papers
that have published sparse attention end
up putting a square root in this term.
>> Okay. So, so far we've done we've looked
at the latency. Um it's kind of hard to
read off cost from this. Uh so if I
think what does cost mean um I'm going
to like to run this inference I'm going
to use the GPU for a certain number of
seconds like 1 millisecond or 20
milliseconds or something like that. Um,
and I have to pay the rental time for
for that for that time. So like it's $2
an hour per GPU or something like that.
Um, so so that's the cost of this
inference, but how much value have how
many tokens have I processed during that
inference? That is the batch size. And
so what we actually want to plot is
going to be the um the cost versus batch
size. Um, which is like T over B uh
versus batch size.
>> Uh, this is the cost per token. Mhm.
>> Um so
like we have to imagine dividing each of
these three curves by by b. So
multiplying by this um reciprocal um and
so what we end up with there is the the
compute curve is going to um it was
linear. we divide by b that makes that
uh a constant here and this is t compute
the um the kv fetch was linear now it
becomes a constant as well um uh uh kv
fetch
and then the
um the the weight fetch uh was constant
and now we've divided by b and so it
becomes this um hyper parabola.
>> Mhm.
>> And so again, we're going to compute the
the max of the sum. Um
so the sum of these two terms shifts the
the uh the parabola up sum of the KB
fetch and the weight fetch um gives us a
sort of a a higher parabola that's like
this. Mhm.
>> And then we're going to take the max
with the compute uh
here. So we end up with this this being
the overall shape that that we care
about.
So again, so like we see some limiting
behavior. The cost initially starts very
high at batch size of one actually like
it almost goes to infinity like uh it's
um because we've got so many weight
fetches which are not advertised over a
large batch size. Um but then as we
increase the batch size the weight
fetches become amortized over so many
different batch elements that they their
cost go grows very small and eventually
the compute time uh ends up driving the
cost.
>> Mhm.
>> So there is a limiting um like lower
bound lower bound on cost
um which is this one here.
>> Yeah. Um,
>> so clawed code slow or codec slow or
whatever would just live on this line
and it wouldn't help much because you're
you're not able to amortize the KV
values over a much bigger badge.
>> Yeah. Yeah. They're unique per batch.
The compute is also unique per batch.
And so what is the minimum work you can
do per batch after amatizing everything
else away? Um so at this point where you
are no longer um memory bandwidth bound,
>> what practically
how big a batch do you need to like how
yeah how big are the batches practically
for frontier models?
>> Um you can you can just solve for that
actually. Um and it's not even
particularly sensitive to model
architecture.
>> So um let let's go ahead and do that. So
what we're talking about is we're going
to say when the memory time is equal to
the compute time. That's that that's
what that question is. Um
for now I'm going to discard the um
because we're focused on what what the
batch size is and really there's a
question of what uh when the weights are
amotized over the um the the multiplies
I'm going to focus on comparing the
weight fetch time to the weight multiply
time. I'm going to disregard the KB
fetch term um just just to simplify the
analysis so we can get a kind of a clean
answer out. Um so we're going to equate
uh
this portion
with this with these two terms. Yeah.
So writing that out um we get n number
of total parameters
over memory uh me memory bandwidth
uh is equal to um
batch size times number of active
parameters
divided by the compute performance.
So looking over here, everything on the
top, these are model parameters.
Everything on the bottom, these are
hardware parameters. Um it it turns out
to be nice to rearrange them such that
we have the hardware parameters on one
side. So So let's this is equivalent to
>> [snorts]
>> um
memory bandwidth
being equal to um batch size times
number of active parameters.
divided by the number of total
parameters.
So, so this is a hardware parameter. Um,
actually the this actually ends up being
a dimensionless constant. Uh, if you
look in terms of flops, what are the
dimensions of this? This is um
multiplies per second. This is bytes per
second. So, that's not quite
dimensionless. But what you do is you
say like multiplies per second times
let's say I'm doing FP4. Um, so I I do
like how many FP4 multiplies per second
times the fact that uh each one each FP4
is half a bite. Um, and so I can
actually make this end ending up being
dimensionless. Um, and and this ends up
being on most GPUs um around 300
somewhere around 300
>> and sorry has that ratio changed over
time as we've gone from model generation
to model generation where the blobs
keeps increasing?
>> So there's a hardware parameter um to
what extent has the hardware changed? So
um from like A100 to A100 to B100 um the
the flops has increased substantially.
The memory band has also increased
substantially and it has remained
reasonably stable.
>> Yeah. And we can we can express this one
as well. This is a sparity parameter.
>> Um and I I might even phrase it slightly
different. Let's solve for batch size in
total. Um we end up with and so we're
just moving this back over to the other
side. we end up with batch size needs to
be bigger than approximately um 300
times sparity.
So for example, if I have 100 like I
activate in deepseek I activate 32 out
of 256 experts. So this would be like
eight for deepseek. Got it. Okay. So so
this actually gives you a ballpark which
is like remarkably accurate to practice.
Generally people will go a little bit
larger than this. they don't really want
to be exactly at the balance point
because um real world efficiencies
aren't as good as a roof line analysis
would say. Um but like take this and
maybe double it or triple it.
>> Okay. So basically it's like 2 to 3,000
tokens per batch. But then if you
included the KB cache,
>> yes,
>> the implication would be that the
optimal batch size should grow larger.
So this is get like we we solve for the
equivalence between when um compute time
is equal to memory time.
If I add in more memory bandwidth like
something that consumes more memory
bandwidth then I have less available for
the the weight loads and so I need to
grow the uh the memory bandwidth more
and therefore the batch size more.
>> This seems incredibly small like a batch
this would be like less than one
sequence, right?
>> Yeah. Okay. So, so I guess this is um
keep in mind that I'm talking about the
number of tokens that I'm generating one
more token for. So, so it's like it's
actually 2,000 unique sequences in
>> Got it. Okay. We're just talking about
the a single forward pass on these
sequences. This is like the Do you think
of like the bash is the number sequences
rather than like
>> That's right. Okay. Cool.
>> Yeah.
>> When I'm prepping for interviews, I
often talk to experts in the field. So,
for Reiner, I chatted with two of James
engineers, Clark and Axel. Clark, who
works on low latency trading systems,
walked me through why Gene Street uses
FPGAAS to make sure that they have
predictable nancond latencies. You can
just build these like giant grids of
compute very easily that do exactly what
you need to touch 100 megabytes of SRAM
and then get your response back in tens
of nanconds very easily and that's
basically impossible on he then went on
to explain why CPUs just wouldn't work
for this kind of thing. And so if you
have a clock that's going every 3 nonds,
you actually have several bytes of
information at a time to make your
decision. That's as opposed to a CPU
where you'll just collect up a whole
packet, you know, let's say a 1500 byt
packet and you say, "Okay, this packet
is ready. Here you go, CPU. You can
start thinking about it now." FPGAs
allow you to react to the earliest part
of the packet as it arrives rather than
having to wait for the full thing. We
also talked about liquid cooling,
network design, and many other things.
If you're interested in this stuff, Jane
Street is hiring. You can check out
their open roles at
janestreet.com/bcash.
And if you want to watch the full prep
conversation, we posted it there, too.
If you've got a Frontier model and you
are actually doing inference,
surely they must have more than 2,000
concurrent users.
>> Yeah.
>> Is there any added latency from the fact
that you need to have the whole batch
fill up? or is it if you have a
reasonable amount of users, it's so
unlikely that you wouldn't it it would
not take you 100 milliseconds to fill up
the next 2,000 slots.
>> Yeah, the the way to think about this, I
guess we think of it as like when does
the train depart as a model. So let's
say I've picked a batch size that I'm
going to run at. Maybe I pick, you know,
this batch size.
>> Um and so like well and by the way, this
intersection point is is the same
intersection point here. Um
>> so I pick this batch size. is I know
that it's going to take for example
maybe it's something like 20
milliseconds is a common place this ends
up landing
>> what I'm going to produce is uh like so
this is a timeline of what is running on
the GPU it's going to start a new batch
every 20 milliseconds uh regardless and
so uh so so each of this is 20 this is
you can think of this as a schedule for
the train a new train departs every 20
millonds any passengers who are board
the train. Um if the train is full, then
they wait to the next train. Um if the
train is not f full, the train's going
to go anyway. Um and so in terms of what
that means for queuing latency, it means
that the worst case is that you like a
request arrives just after the train
departed. It has to wait for the next
train. So that's up to 20 millonds and
then it has to wait for that train to to
complete. Uh and so the worst case
latency is 40.
>> So how is it 20 millconds derived? Um I
mean rule of thumb but where it comes
from is not fully explained yet but um
so far we've focused on memory bandwidth
and compute uh time. Uh when we look at
memory the other consideration is that
we want to use all of the memory
capacity we have. Um and so generally
we're going to use all of that memory
capacity to store the weights or the
KBs. And so we just want to read like in
the time of doing a forward pass maybe
we want to read all of the memory
capacity into into the chip. Um and so
that is capacity divided by bandwidth
that tends to be 20 milliseconds on on
many different generations of HPM.
>> The units make sense. You would have a
uh a bite divided bytes per second.
>> Yeah. So for example, I mean on on I
think the Reuben generation it is
something like 288 GB um divided by 20
terabytes per second. Um uh and
this looks like it comes out to about 15
millconds.
Yeah. Let me make sure I understand what
it's saying. I mean I understand how why
the units can't the sort of unit
analysis but what is it saying is
we can evacuate and replace the HBM in
this amount of time. And so we don't
want to be in a situation where
the HBM is not big enough that we're
not, you know, actually able to
keep write everything we want to it or
take everything out of it or we don't
want to be in a situation where our
ability to write back and forth is so
big or so small compared. Yeah, there's
sort of two scenarios. Why don't we pick
a latency that is bigger than 15
milliseconds? And um if I think what
that means, it means I actually have
time to read the HBM like twice. Y
>> um by the way, most of HPM accesses is
reads, not writes. It's like almost all
reads because the weight matrices are
read only and then almost all of the KB
cache accesses are reads. So um in like
let's say I run 30 milliseconds, I can
read all of HPM twice, but what's the
point of that? Like I I don't want to
read the white matrices twice. Um I
don't want to read the KVs twice.
>> Yeah, it makes sense. Makes a ton of
sense. Okay, so a couple of actually
quick questions. One, if it is the case
that the optimal batch size is something
like 2,00 and that actually true, it's
totally dependent on the sparity. It's
not dependent on the model size or
anything.
>> I mean sparity shows up in model size,
but beyond that, it only depends on
sparity, not on scale. But that's a very
interesting result and that seems to
imply that you can
one question is how much of a push
towards centralization is it that you
would have these economies of scale from
inference from batching.
>> Yeah.
>> But it seems like it's not that big a
deal like I don't know is 2,000 users at
the same time a lot. It doesn't seem
like a lot.
>> We can do a bit of analysis on this
which would be actually it's like you
can think of it in terms of number of
users but maybe a more productive way to
think of it is in terms of number of
tokens per second.
>> Mhm. So what does this batch size uh
mean in terms of tokens per second of
this of the system? So um tokens per
second um tokens per second is going to
be equal to the batch size. We run a
batch many tokens and then we do that
every um t
so every time intervals which is let's
say which is uh which is this thing is
equal to the 15 milliseconds 20
milliseconds number. So um this ends up
being batch size itself times
uh about 60. So um like 64 * b um and so
this ends up being around
uh 2,00 * 64. So like 128 um 128k uh
tokens per
sort of in more digestible units like uh
it's hard to reason about concurrent
users but what is the global traffic for
for a system? Um
uh when you look at some of the
announcements uh sometimes the API
providers will will brag about how much
traffic they have. Um the the the
numbers that I've remembered from some
announcements of Gemini last year were
in the hundreds of millions of tokens
per second worldwide. So so uh about a
thou like this is 1,000th of that.
>> Yeah. But I mean the Gemini is big,
right? That's actually 1,000 of Gemini
is a lot to to actually be like uh
>> to be competitive at scale, you need to
be able to serve at least 1,000 of
Gemini. Yeah,
>> that's interesting.
>> Um, cool. Um, okay. So,
the more sparsity you have, the less
compute you need.
And it does seem that as batch sizes get
bigger, compute ends up being the
bottleneck. Mhm.
>> According to this analysis. So then the
question is how far can you take
sparity? That is to say as the sparity
ratio increases as you have fewer and
fewer active parameters relative to
total parameters how much is performance
of the model degrading and is it
degrading faster than you're saving
compute by increasing the sparity
factor.
>> Yeah. So performance equality of the of
the model rather than speed of the
model. Yeah. Yeah.
>> So unfortunately we're not able to
answer that analytically. That's um
>> that is an empirical question of model
quality.
>> Best I can do is pull up a paper and
answer that empirically.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Uh should we follow the paper now
or is it make sense?
>> Yeah. So so this paper this is unified
laws for routed language models. It's a
somewhat old paper by this stage but one
of the things that they did is looked at
if I keep increasing sparity what is the
model quality impact? This answer is
very sensitive to the actual choice of
mixture of experts. Mixture of experts
has been around for a really long time.
I think it was maybe even back in 2017.
Um
but the tech techniques have changed a
lot. Deepseek mixture of experts was was
a big change in how it worked. Um there
have been older papers which are Gshar
uh switch transformer. So the actual
empirical results are going to depend on
all of that. Um but on one of the older
techniques that is shown here you can
see if I hold constant the number of
active parameters at a certain size and
then I increase the sparity which they
call expert count here the quality keeps
increasing and then if you imagine like
drawing a horizontal line from 1.3B
dense
>> uh across you end up seeing that for
example in this case the 64 expert 370
million activated parameters model is as
good as a dense 1.3 billion model. So in
some sense it's actually not amazing
returns where you need to increase total
parameters 100fold to get the equivalent
of 10x as many active parameters.
>> Yeah I mean actually even more so yeah
it's a huge increase in parameter count
for a modest increase in in
>> yeah so in this case actually it's what
what is it 4x
>> 64x for 4x. Yeah. So
while it is while it is true I guess
that the you get this benefit of
being able to economize on your compute
time if you increase sparsity.
Um naively it would seem like oh that's
a trade-off worth making. But if this is
this you're decreasing this by 2x and
then having this go up by 8x every time
you double
>> sparity. So is that good or bad?
Actually um even from a memory point of
view keep in mind um you are doubling
this portion of the memory fetches which
is amotized by batch and so just just
keep running a larger batch size. Um
from the point of view of the analysis
we've done here this is pure win. Keep
doing it. Um uh keep doing it until you
run out of available users basically.
>> Mhm. Um, so there's actually this
equivalence between uh if I want to go
sparse or if I have a lot of users, I
can go to a much sparer model. So from
that point of view, it's it's a
reasonable trade-off. Um, the other
trade-off that shows up here is that um
it also consumes memory capacity, which
we we've only reasoned about memory
bandwidth here, but it also consumes
memory capacity.
>> So let me just make sure I understood.
You're saying
we want bigger we we want um to spend
less time computing therefore we do more
sparity to make that work we need bigger
batch sizes
>> which means we need more memory capacity
um
>> yeah so
>> to have more sparity.
>> Yeah. So I mean maybe this would be a
good point to actually um talk about how
a mixture of experts layer is typically
laid out on on a like on a rack of GPUs
or something like that.
>> Yeah. Yeah, makes sense.
>> Yeah. Where were we?
>> Uh sparse mixture of experts. Um maybe
how we lay that on out on a GPU.
>> Yeah.
>> So, um let's zoom in on the mixture of
experts layer first and and and sort of
draw what that looks like.
>> So, we typically um will have a some
kind of a router layer
>> um which is making the decision of where
we route uh the experts uh the tokens
to. So, we get tokens coming in here.
They go through a router layer and then
we have a bunch of different um experts.
Uh I'll draw draw a few more um to line
some up. Um and then the router will
make a decision and which experts am I
going to route to? And it'll be a small
fraction of them. Maybe one in 32. So
maybe it'll make a decision to route to
this one. Um uh maybe this one and maybe
this one.
>> Mhm.
uh these experts. So these each expert
itself is a normal MLP. It has a up
projection and then a down projection
with a nonlinearity in between. Um and
then finally we sort of do the inverse
operation. So where we were broadcasting
things out here um we're going to bring
them back in and sum them up. So
bringing them in like this.
Uh and then finally we have our residual
connection. So that the token is also
passed through here and it gets added
to the result of thee layer. So so this
is a normal layer. Um what I want to
talk through is how this is mapped to a
like a GPU rack um and what this means
for communication uh because I think
this will will start to show some of the
the limits of how fast we can go.
>> Yeah.
>> So um the standard practice here and it
it is the best solution is to use um
expert parallelism. So that means
different experts go on different GPUs.
So if we take something like a Deepseek
model, um they have 256 experts. Um
let's say we want to run that on a
Blackwell rack. Um so there are 72 GPUs.
Um we have a divisibility problem. This
is not a power of two. Um so we'll just
like simplify and say we're only going
to use 64 of them. Um just ignore the
other eight. It's not a big deal. Um and
so we we have four experts per GP. uh
very simple um uh for the sake of the
diagram I'll actually just say let's
let's say we have two experts per GPU so
we um we end up just putting uh these
are the GPU boundaries every pair of
experts is on its own GPU um
and then we can look at the
communication cost we had some experts
stored some tokens stored centrally here
they get routed to all of these experts
um and so uh there's some communication
cost paid Here there's the same
communication cost paid on the output.
Um and then the hope is that uh this
does not become communication committed.
Um now what is the traffic pattern here?
Um the traffic pattern here is that any
GPU in fact will be talking to any other
GPU depending on um the the decisions
made by the model. So this is an
allto-all traffic pattern.
>> So when you say any GPU in the pretense,
>> yeah,
>> the router is more than one GPU. Yeah,
the router. So I I drew this as one
router. Uh in reality, you would
actually have many copies of the router
and so you would have um as as many
routers as as GPUs in fact
>> as as as the incoming incoming traffic.
>> Yeah. So these are these are the these
are 64 GPUs. These are 64 GPUs. It's
actually the same GPUs. We just like
draw them as a separate because they're
serving different purposes.
>> So at this point any GPU can be sending
to any any other GPU. So this all
to-wall pattern um of communication that
shows up uh how the blackwell racks are
configured um is a is a perfect fit for
the um the communication pattern that
thee actually wants to do. Um however if
you think maybe I want to do like maybe
one rack is too slow and I want to do
two racks. Um then I have this challenge
that like maybe I've got some sort of
rack boundary drawn outside here like
this. Um,
and I no longer in fact have all toall
communication between all the GPUs in
two racks. Um, and so the rackto-rack
communication ends up being a
substantial bottleneck. So, uh, this
sort of like the fundamental thing here
is that one rack is actually the bounds
the size of an expert layer you can do.
And so, uh, this has been part of what's
been driving towards um, larger and
larger interconnect domains.
>> Yeah. Um before we it may be worth you
explaining what exactly a rack is
>> the differences in bandwidth between
Iraq
>> and within Iraq
>> and the all versus not all nature of
communication within versus outside.
>> Yeah. And and this is a place where it
starts to be very different in fact
between uh Nvidia for example and Google
and then others including us. Um the so
generally uh a rack is a um
it is a physical structure. Um it it's a
few meters tall um meter or two wide
depends on configuration. Um and it
stores uh some number of GPUs or XPUs
which is typically about 64. Um the the
con what constrains it being a certain
size is power delivery weight um and
cooling ability. uh it it ends up being
about this size in in many cases because
of these physical constraints. Um so
then when I deploy a data center like
I've got a data center may have
thousands of these racks. So I've got
one of these tall racks. It's got a
bunch of GPUs in it um uh and so on. Um
and then I put another rack um next. Um
>> you make it sound so easy.
>> Yeah. Right. I just like drop them in.
Um in Nvidia's case um the the
communication uh topology um is uh
actually it it they put the GPUs on on
the outside of the rack and then they
put these switches on the inside of the
rack. So what this ends up being is that
there's a set of switches in here. Um
these are the NV switches.
>> Mhm.
>> And then they run a bunch of cables. Um,
every single GPU uh has cables um going
going to the switches in the middle. Um,
so uh every GPU goes to the switches in
the middle and then uh the switches have
connections to all the GPUs. So all of
the GPUs can talk to all the other GPUs
uh in in just like two hops going to the
switch going to the other GPU. Now when
I want to leave the rack, I end up going
via a different path. Um the GPUs have
also a much slower um uh connectivity
which is typically about eight times
slower um which is uh so so the green
that I drew here in GPU cases is the NVL
link. More generally it's called the
scale up network. Um uh this is the
scale up network. Um [snorts]
you will typically um also have a scale
out network which allows you to connect
to like some data center switch. Um so
data center switch
And then all of the GPUs will have some
connectivity up to some data center
switch somewhere.
>> Um but this is this is about times uh
like this is the scale out um
and it tends to be about about eight
times slump
uh in bad words.
So the the challenge if you want to for
example lay out a mixture of expert
layer across two racks is that
half of the GPUs here are going to be
wanting to talk to to talk to the GPUs
GPUs here. And so um like half of the
like just on average like when I look at
where the tokens on on these GPUs want
to go half of the tokens want to go
inside the rack that's great they can
use the the fast scale up network but
half the tokens are going to want to
leave the rack and go to the other rack
and that's not as good. they're going to
need to use a much slower network. And
so that becomes the bottleneck on uh on
on the all to-all pattern. Um a
different choice would be well why don't
I like have a big switch here and sort
of like um and connect uh everything to
some big switching uh like much bigger
switch that actually combines the two
racks together. There are many ideas in
this direction but in general it becomes
uh the reason you have this sort of
hierarchy of switches rather than one
big switch is to manage the cabling
congestion. uh you just need to run a
large number of cables.
>> Sorry. Is this is that question you just
asked basically why isn't it a bigger
scale up?
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Why not why not just like have like a
million chips in scale up?
>> What has changed that is allowed Nvidia
to go from Hopper was eight then
Blackwell is 72 and now Reuben will be
is it 500 or something?
>> 500 and something. Yeah.
>> Um what what has allowed that to happen?
uh from Hopper to to Blackwell is is
mostly just a uh the decision to switch
from uh uh trays as the form factor or
one of these as a tray to to switching
to racks as the form factor. That's a
product decision. It's um there wasn't a
substantial technical barrier there. Um
>> uh switching from uh from the like uh 64
to to 500 or so. Um there's a bit of
Jensen math there, but uh uh there is at
least a genuine 4x increase um which is
um coming from a much more complicated
and difficult rack design. And so that
that is actually like new new physical
design to run more cables.
>> And the cable complication is just the
the the cost of figuring out which cable
hops to which or like which signal goes
from.
>> Let's sort of zoom in on this and look
at the the wire density. Um,
I'll draw this diagram just once more.
So, we have a bit of a cleaner version
to work with and a larger version. Um,
let's say I have some switches in the
middle. Yep.
>> Um, and let's say I'm going to have
initially I'm going to start with just
two GPUs on each side or two trays of
GPUs on each side. Um, and let's say
maybe each tray wants to have uh two
cables coming out of it. Um,
so I get some kind of I I physically run
vertical cables that look like this
running to the switches. Um, now if I
want to double the number of GPUs in a
rack, um,
uh, I need to run like literally twice
the density of cables. So, um, I need to
run Yeah. Uh,
these as well. Um,
>> extremely question, but if you look at a
physical data center Mhm.
Seems like there's a lot of space within
a rack. I don't know. Just like the
cables are like really big and
>> Yeah. So there is space outside the
rack. Inside the rack like these racks
are like I mean as they become more
optimized these racks are very tight. So
um there's uh connector density going
from um from from from the tray into the
rack and the rack's back plane. Um and
then the back plane itself has a has has
a really high density. Um there are
other physical constraints including
like bend radius of cables like you
don't want to snap them and so on.
>> Yeah.
>> It's literally the physical space to put
a cable that's constraining it.
>> Yeah.
>> I had no idea. Interesting.
>> Uh that seems surprising that like
>> of a hu the rack is so big and it just
like we can't just stuff more cables in
there.
>> Yeah. So I mean rack design is not my
expertise but like when I talk to to
folks and what are the constraints
they're up against it's it's a
combination of um uh so what are the big
physical things you're optimizing for?
um space uh weight of the rack like it's
actually really heavy and so like you
need enough metal to not sag and fall
but then you add more metal and it's
heavier. Um and then power and cooling
and so all of those are competing for
like modern racks are pushing all of
those to very extreme physical limits.
>> Deep work is by its nature quite
aversive. So even things which seem like
work like Slack and email can be easy
ways to distract yourself. So, I often
wish that I could just turn the internet
off, but if I'm prepping for an
interview, even if I have the papers and
books on hand, it's still super useful
to be able to do a back and forth in the
LLM so I can break down concepts and
research follow-ups. Google's new Gemma
4 is the first open model that allows me
to have this kind of fully disconnected
focus machine. It's small enough to run
on my laptop, but good enough to
actually be useful. So, to prep for this
episode, I downloaded Reer Scaling book
and shut off the internet. I was able to
have Gemma help me understand the
material and answer my questions. If you
want an LLM that you can run locally on
your laptop or even your phone, you
should check out Gemma 4.
>> When was GP4 released again? It was 2022
or 2023.
>> Three. Okay. And it was rumored to be
over one trillion parameters
>> and it seems like only now and within
the last 6 months have models been
getting released that are significantly
more parameters than a model released 3
years ago.
>> Yeah. when supposedly there should have
been this um uh scaling in the meantime.
Is the reason that we were just waiting
for racks with enough memory to hold the
five trillion parameter model along with
its KV Kash for enough you know users
for a full um for a lot of sequences or
RL if you're doing RL kind of a similar
consideration of actually holding the KB
cache for all the the uh
>> the the the batch of problems you're
trying to solve. Um so if you look at
like hopper you had eight hoppers and I
think the
>> that's 640 gigabytes uh as of 2022.
Yeah.
>> Um
>> with black well finally which was
deployed what 2020
>> very recently maybe last year.
>> Last year
>> you finally have a scale up with on the
order of like 10 20 terabytes.
>> Mhm.
>> Which is enough for like a 5T model plus
KB cache.
>> Yeah. Um deploying in in larger scale up
domains is a huge unlock. Um yeah, I
mean
>> I've drawn here the sort of Nvidia
Blackwell deployment. Um the Google
deployment uh has actually had very
large scale domains for
>> and that also explains why Gemini was
seem to be ahead like was Gemini 2.5 was
a successful or it just seems like
Gemini has that successful pre-train for
longer than some of the other labs. I
not having been there at the time, I'm
not sure how much is coming from like
successfully deploying higher sparity
ratios which which could be um it could
also be I mean there's a whole bunch of
actual modeling things of like uh
specifically how do you do the mixture
of experts uh we've seen the um deepseek
uh like the deepseek mixture of expert
has said actually activate more experts
but finer grained experts was a big
innovation
>> um I'm sure that there are many other
innovations on the model architecture as
well as on the training data it's kind
hard to disentangle all of them. But uh
what shows up in terms of the limits of
what you can do um
the the active parameters uh as we saw
is limited by the compute cost um and
then the total parameters is limited by
the scaleup size.
>> Yep. When you're operating within a
single scale of domain, is that a
consideration specifically for either
forward or backward
or specifically for prefill versus
decode
or is it is it preferred to always be
within a scale up
>> whatever kind of workload you have
whether you're doing a pre-training run
or whether you're doing RL generation or
whether you're doing inference for
users. Yeah, really interesting. Um so
okay so uh to answer that question we're
going to need to talk about the
communication patterns um that so we've
talked about the mixture of expert
communication pattern that is this all
to all um uh all to all
to all um all to all very strongly
favors um uh full connectivity which is
what we've kind of just shown here and
it favors being within one rack Um there
are other kinds of parallelism besides
expert parallelism which which which we
just showed here in the literature is
tensor parallelism. This is um with a
trend towards smaller experts this has
become much less relevant. So we can
ignore that. Um but the other two things
that we have available are data
parallelism and pipeline parallelism. Um
and they are actually much they can be a
much better fit for uh using multiple
racks. So let's focus on pipeline
parallelism specifically. Um, this is
one layer of um, I'm going to have like
a 100 more layers up above. Um, I could
decide at this point, for example, to
move to a different rack, change rack.
Now, is that going to become a
communication bottleneck? So, we can
actually just solve for when this
becomes a communication bottleneck. Um
but before we do that algebraically like
let's just sort of visualize it out and
sketch the path. So we're going to have
a bunch this is another layer and we're
going to have another layer here and so
on. Um uh so let's say I change rack
here and then some number of layers
later I change rack here as well. Um
so our our our methodology that we're
going to use to determine whether we
have a communication bottleneck in this
like in this point where we change rack
>> [snorts]
>> um is we're going to compare the this
this is the scale out um scale out um
bandwidth requirements to the scale up
bandwidth requirements.
>> Mhm.
So let's try this. And and I mean the
hint is going to be that um there's a
lot more sends here like we're sending
many things here whereas we're only
sending one thing here and then we're
also maybe doing it many times. That's
so that's going to be the uh what what
makes the difference.
>> Uh c can I try to guess just out of
curiosity to see if I'm actually
understanding. Um it seems like you're
sending like
>> batch size into the rack
>> in here.
>> Yes. Uh but the communication within
Iraq is sort of batch size
times number of GPUs.
>> Yeah. So number of activated GPUs,
right? So like I I don't send to this
GPU at all, right? So there's an
explosion from one to like it's three
times larger here in in this diagram.
>> Yeah.
>> Um the key thing is that I I didn't even
need to send to this GPU at all. And so
that's a big saving.
>> I see. Yeah.
>> Okay. So we're going to talk through um
uh sort of how much more uh what is the
slowdown of to what extent is scale up
uh a bottleneck over scale uh over scale
out. So uh we will directly jump to the
ratio of the time spent on uh scale up
time on scale up
over the time spent on scale out. So
this this is the quantity we're talking
about. Um
and the first consideration is that the
scale up is like um uh scale up is is
eight times faster than scale out
generally. And so uh at a baseline if
the bandwidths were the same we would
have this one one over eight which is
coming from bandwidth
bandwidth.
But then we have some amount of
expansion in in in how much data we're
sending. So if one token comes in here,
>> then this one token gets routed to in
the deep sea case, it'll get routed to
maybe 32 experts or or 16 experts gets
routed to some number of experts. So
this is the number of activated experts.
Number of activated
experts
Um, and then it also
this the same thing applies on multiple
different layers. So maybe I'm going to
run two layers. So um there's also a
multiple
times um number of layers uh
per stage.
>> And you need to multiply the whole thing
by two for the um for the Yes. Yes. And
there's a factor. Thank you. Um
so what we would like is the for the
scale up time to be greater than the
scale out time. Um because like the
scale up time is the more important and
precious resource. And so we just we
want this one we would like this number
to be greater than or equal to one. Um
and this really doesn't seem hard like
we there's just a factor of eight that
we need to overcome. So we need the
product of these three things to be
bigger than eight. Um typically we have
a fairly large number of activated
experts. could be eight um by itself. Um
and then we can increase the number of
layers per stage a lot until until we we
satisfy this.
>> I see.
>> Um so what this ends up looking like is
that I can in fact have an entire
pipeline of racks where one rack does
one layer and then I move on to the next
rack and I do another layer and then I
move on to the next rack. I can do
another layer. It's interesting to me
that the best parallelism
uh strategy in practice ends up being
one which physically resembles the
actual architecture. It's not some
galaxy brain thing, you know, it's like,
oh, we have experts, we're going to put
them on different GPUs. Oh, we have
different layers. We're just going to
put them on different racks. Isn't that
I feel that's interesting that the
physical and
>> the the the model architecture matches
like the the cutting matches the model
architecture.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Yeah. I mean it could have been
something wackier with tensor
parallelism and whatever.
>> Yeah. So I mean I think a way to think
of it is I mean okay the galaxy brain
way to think of it is um like what are
all the different dimensions in which a
model is scaled up. Um and so there is
uh it is scaled up by layers. It is
scaled up by the like the model uh
dimension. It is scaled up by the DFF
dimension. It is scaled up by the number
of experts. Um every single one of those
numbers you can choose to cut along. Um
and if those numbers are big enough, it
eventually becomes profitable to gong
there.
>> Um and we have selected two of them. The
other two in the way typical models are
typically sized are not profitable.
>> So there's um talk by Ilia where he says
today we know not to do pipeline
parallelism
and Horses gave my friends and me
I hate that it sounds like a Dr.
quote [laughter]
but he gave us a lecture on these
different kinds of parallelisms and he
said the problem with pipeline
parallelism is that it other than the
bubbles it constrain it creates these
architectural constraints yes
>> on um like Kimmy for example has these
uh residuals where attention attends to
the
>> a few back or something
>> yeah layers a few back and so that
becomes hard to implement in this way
>> yeah um so and I guess we didn't really
fully articulate even what is the
benefit that we're getting from
pipelining.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> uh and so these complexities are real.
It's pipelining is a massive hassle.
It's uh but it does give you some
benefits. Um
>> the uh and then you can then decide
whether those benefits are worth it
worth the costs. Um the uh the biggest
benefit that shows up so it can has some
benefits in inference maybe bigger
benefits in training. Um in inference
what are we saving on? Are we saving on
um memory time or compute time? Not
really. We're just moving the memory
time from one chip to another chip um or
one rack to a different rack. There's no
actual benefit in runtime. Um
however, what we are saving on is that
the memory capacity is uh the amount of
memory used per rack. If we think that
the memory in a rack is a bottleneck,
then there's a constraint on how fast we
can go. Um it pipelining allows us to
massively reduce that bottleneck.
>> I I I guess but the
opposite connotation to this which
actually before this I was chatting
before this interview I was chatting
with um Axel who's a GPU performance
engineer at uh Jane Street and he was
explaining well to do pipelining you had
to do micro batches rather than full
batches.
>> Mh. And if you do micro batches, then
you're by definition not able to
amortize
the weight loading the weights. That's
right. Across
>> all the users or all the sequences. And
so the positive connotation of that is
you don't have to use as much memory.
The negative connotation is that of that
is that we can't amortize loading the
weights across all those users. Maybe
it's worth explaining why you had to do
microbatches because you can't.
>> So we draw the mic the pipeline bubble.
Um yeah.
>> Okay. So, so why do we do um uh what
what is this microbatching that shows up
in shows up in pipeline parallelism? So,
um the uh I'll focus on inference first.
It's it's a slightly simpler problem. Um
so, and I'm going to draw uh so this is
time um and then this is which rack uh
rack um we're on. And so, the idea is
that maybe I'll have like four racks. So
I've got um uh an inference that is
going to like step through these four
racks in some time like this.
So this is inference number zero. Um
uh it runs at a certain batch size uh
and it steps through all all the
pipeline stages like this. Now if we
were to say well we're going to run
inference number one here like this is
clearly like a massive waste, right?
Like um like threequarters of the time
each of the racks is doing nothing. So
um so so we don't actually run inference
one here. We we we run it as soon as we
can which is immediately after um
inference zero finishes like this. Um so
uh and then we keep um so if we hadn't
filled this in we would call this the
pipeline bubble. Um when I've drawn it
in this inference context where we're
only going in a forwards pass it's like
obvious like why would you do the stupid
thing?
>> But in a training context uh it's maybe
less obvious. But in the inference
context, it's it's sort of really
natural to to make this change.
>> Oh, interesting. So, this sort of
obvious, but um
the difference between microbash and
bash doesn't matter at all in inference
because you can just call whatever you
want, whatever.
>> Yeah,
>> it it only matters in training because
there is an optimal batch size.
>> Yes. And before you do the backward
step, you want to have accumulated
before you do a full backward step, you
want to have accumulated all the
sequences in that bash. And if you want
to do pipeline and training in order to
avoid that bubble, you need to
>> should we draw the the training diagram?
Yeah, let's do that. Let's do that. Um,
>> so so this is the inference diagram and
I'll call this four just so we don't
have the wrong thing showing up there.
Um, so let's do the same thing for
training. Now we've got a forwards pass,
but at some stage we're going to have to
transition to a backwards pass. So we'll
we'll do some number of uh batches in
the forwards pass
and then we're going to transition to
the backwards pass for everyone all in
one go.
So the the inference part is the same uh
here but then we do a hard stop at this
point and then transition everyone to
backwards pass um similar numbering like
this. It may be worth clarifying the
reason there is that hard stop is
because you want to do a whole batch at
once for the backward step
>> and then there is an optimal size for
how big that batch should be.
>> Yeah. I mean smaller is always better
actually is is is is a way to put it but
uh it's a like from a ML convergence
rate perspective smaller is always
better because basically you're getting
the freshest information from from from
the gradient descent
>> but total trading time perspective
>> total training time perspective it's wor
like smaller is worse from a systems
perspective and so the optimum is the
trade-off between those two
>> so you pick a batch size um and you uh
and then like for that batch size you
you do some amount forwards and then a
some amount backwards Y
>> you asked why why is there even a hard
stop there pipeline parallelism because
of this the like the fact that you've
got this idle time here which is the the
bubble um there are so many techniques
in the literature for how to um lay this
out differently and and avoid that there
are more complicated schemes called like
zero bubble or one forward one backward
which sort of interle the forwards and
the backwards in complicated ways but uh
>> you can mine bitcoin in that
>> right right more usefully you can do the
weight gradient uh step but uh but you
can also maybe yeah so in inference
actually the the effect of of pipelining
on anything you care about like batch
size or latency actually is neutral it
it doesn't improve it doesn't make it
worse so if you look at the latency of
this inference running it if it were
pipelined versus if it were all on one
rack if it were all on one rack we would
just like slide all of the the boxes
down uh and still put them in a row and
the latency would be the same So um
pipelining is neither better nor worse
for latency. Um but it it does mean that
you just use less memory per per rack
like memory capacity because now instead
of needing the whole model you only need
a quarter of the model.
>> Makes a ton of sense. So basically no
brainer to use pipelining during
inference but there's this hardware
trade-off during training.
>> So so even in inference in fact it is
not used a ton. Um it say it reduces
your memory capacity requirements. Um
there's actually a huge surplus like um
I think you're saying that a a a
rack of blackwell has many many
terabytes maybe tens of terabytes of uh
that's much bigger than um like a
trillion parameter model a trillion
parameter model is only needs one
terabyte. Um, and so it already fits in
fact. And so there's not a huge benefit
from um from pipelining because you
you're reducing a number that's already
pretty small.
>> But it does say that theoretically maybe
you had too much memory and uh maybe you
could have done a different uh like
build a different hardware that has less
memory. In fact,
>> if [snorts] you were designing your
hardware like and you said I actually
didn't need that much memory because um
I don't need the weights to fit in one
rack. I can fit the weights in eight
racks. um then uh I could have maybe
built a hardware that didn't have so
much HPM per GPU.
>> Last week, Horses was kind enough to
give me and my friends a great lecture
on large scale pre-training systems. And
there were some concepts that I wanted
to animate for a write up on my blog
like how weight shard and gradients flow
depending on the parallelism that you're
using. So I gave cursor my lecture notes
and a sketch that I made during the
lecture and I asked it to visualize a
specific hierarchal collective that
Horus had explained. The first version
was already pretty good and then I was
able to use design mode to select and
tweak any specific components from
there. I was able to do all of this
without a clear end state in mind.
Cursor's composer too fast model was
quick enough that I was able to iterate
almost instantaneously. I could try an
idea, test the results in the built-in
browser and immediately make any
changes. I went through 10 different
versions in under 20 minutes. If you
want to check out this animation, I
published it along with the lecture
notes in a blog post. The link is in the
description. And if you want to try out
this kind of iterative design flow for
yourself, go to cursor.com/larch
to get started. So macro question,
everybody's talking about the memory
wall right now. Memory is getting super
expensive. There's not enough memory.
Smartphone volume will go down 30%
because there's not enough memory.
Hyperscalers are spending this is
shocking if I'm Dylan said they're
spending 50% of their capex this year
>> on memory.
>> On memory that's believable. Yeah.
>> So like what is hyperscaler capex? It's
like high hundreds of billions maybe a
trillion and they're spending half of
that on memory. Okay. So that that is a
huge constraint. That's why we're not
going to get new laptops and phones this
year.
>> Um
>> but at the same time we're we have too
much memory. Like people are willing to
put too much memory into these systems,
>> right? So um this is
>> like why why why is Jedet shoving all
this memory into these racks if
>> Yeah. If you don't need it.
>> Yeah. So we've like in in the um
equations we had here before we raised
them we were doing memory time. So
memory bandwidth and and compute
bandwidth. Let's now start looking at uh
memory capacity.
>> Yeah.
>> So we'll start off with just like memory
capacity without even thinking about
parallelism scheme. Um and so the um uh
like the capacity of memory um or the or
the the demand on memory is um the
number of total parameters
um plus so so this is what we need to
fit the weights in some system that we
are using
>> um and then we need to fit the KVs as
well. So, KVs go as batch size times the
length of the context um times uh times
the bytes bytes per bytes per um
okay so um
what I was arguing about in this context
and the case I was making uh for
pipelining is that um we will actually
there are some techniques that allow us
to solve this other techniques that
allow us to solve this so let's let's
consider
So we're going to run this on some
number of GPUs and and we're going to
say um we're going to have one extended
which is um uh E is going to be the
expert parallelism.
So how many when we had this charting of
uh uh expert layer across many GPUs how
much of that uh to what extent do we do
that? How many GPUs? Um
so we're going to say that this is fact
for example 64
and then P is going to be the extent of
pipeline
pipelining.
Um and so this is the number of racks
which who knows maybe maybe we'll pick
four or something like that
what we want to calculate. So this is
the this is like the total um total
memory requirement across the system. Um
but now I'm going to calculate a um a
memory requirement per GPU. So per per
GPU memory requirement
uh we're going to have I guess I'll use
a lower case C me. Um
and well obviously we just take all
these numbers and divide it by en really
easy. So um uh it's this n total um plus
the batch time length of context
time bytes
per toke. Um all of this is divided by e
* p.
Okay. So this is like why is this
correct to divide it this way? Um well
we're we're we're saying we knew that
the parameters were perfectly divided
amongst all the the GPUs in a rack.
They're al the layers are perfectly
divided amongst the the the different
racks. So that works here and somehow
we're going to arrange I'll handwave
exactly how somehow we can arrange the
same perfect sharding of of the contexts
across GPUs in a rack and and and then
based on layer across uh racks
>> and sorry for the number of racks
>> uh yeah for example
>> yeah um
so um this is the place where we
actually need to go back and analyze
this batch size B and you were making
this comment that there's micro batching
versus global batching
So um let's come back to this pipelining
diagram here. Um we've got one batch
going forward here and then as I drew
it, it kind of just like disappeared.
That's not really correct. If you think
about um how decode is working, I have a
bunch of tokens that I have generated
already. I do one forwards pass where I
generate a new token and then and then I
push like then I write that to my KB
cache and then I do another forwards
pass that generates the next token.
>> So I'm actually going to be running this
batch zero in a loop. So
>> in fact I go forwards once I finish I
can start the next iteration of the loop
up here. Yeah.
So we'll just fill this in. We'll have a
Oh. Uh, nice. Yes. [laughter]
Um, yeah. So, we've got the two or three
little two and three. Uh, two three. Uh,
so let's split this batch. This batch
will be the global batch size. So B is
going to be the um number of number of
micro batches
times the batch of like the batch size
per micro batch. So how many micro
batches do we need? So the number of
microbatches in this diagram is four 0 1
2 3 um and then the batch size per um
like the microbatch size this is still
this like 2,000ish number. Um this is
the one that is like um
>> Mhm.
>> This is the like 2,00 um times sparity
uh sorry uh no this is the 300 time
sparity uh 300 times sparity.
>> This is this is the how big the train
that takes up every 20 milliseconds,
>> right? Yes. This is going to be the the
20 milliseconds uh train. Um so the
global batch size is the number of
microbatches times the the local batch
size. Local batch size is set by this
hardware parameter. the number of
microbatches
um well the number of microbatches is as
small as possible such that we can like
wrap around uh and not leave any idle
time when we wrap around. So if we like
if we had fewer we would have have this
idle time when we wrap around and so you
can sort of just visually see that it is
equal to the number of pipeline stages I
mean sort of proof by visual here like
it is four and it's four this way as
well but I can you can sort of look and
see that it goes along here and then it
wraps around um number of fun stages
>> yeah it's a very basic question this is
what is actually done
>> okay like as in a frontier model today
will actually have during inference have
pipeline
>> uh for sure during
massive scale training this is done um
it can be done for inference I'm
actually going to make the case for why
it is less attractive it is useful for
weights but not so useful for Ks yeah
yeah
>> um the big challenge is so let's let's
fill this in the microbatch size here
ends up being equal to the number of
pipeline stages y
>> when we go back and substitute this all
of that into Here
we get a um
number of pipeline stages times um this
little b
showing up in here. And then when we
factor this out, I'm going to split this
into like this plus into two two terms.
Um
we get the full division by e * p over
here.
We still have division by E * P over
here, but the P's cancel, this P and
this P. Um,
they cancel
and so what we find if you increase the
number of uh pipeline stages, the memory
footprint for the number of weights
keeps going down and down and down, but
the memory footprint for the number of
activations stays constant. So, so it it
it doesn't actually work like most of
your memory um ends up like once you do
enough pipelining and it's really not
much like even two is often enough. Um
this term becomes very small. This
becomes the dominant term. The KB cache
becomes the dominant term.
>> Yeah, I I know this is wrong. I'm trying
to think out why logic here is wrong. If
you have many different um you're
pipelining through many different
stages, the KV values are not shared
between layers. So why would it not help
to be pipelining across multiple layers
because then you don't have to store
>> Yeah, you only need to store like one
layer rather than two layers of KVs,
right? So So it helps from that
perspective. You're right. Um
what's competing with that though is
that you need to be keeping all of the
racks usefully busy at a time. And so
the number of sequences that are in
flight simultaneously has gone up.
>> Ah yeah yeah yeah makes sense makes
sense makes sense.
>> So those exactly cancel and and you end
up not getting a saving per GPU.
>> Right. This is going back fundamentally
to the point of you're you're not able
to amvertise across KV caches.
>> Yeah. Well so first we did you can't
amortize KV caches across batch size and
now we're saying you also can't um shard
it across pipeline stages. Um uh it it
sucks from both of those points of view.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Interesting.
>> Okay. Because then what is done during
inference?
>> Um so I mean a like the deepseek paper
reports what they do which is like um
they just do a lot of expert
parallelism. You should in effect you
should increase your expert parallelism
up to your scale up domain size.
>> Um and then do very little pipelining.
Maybe none at all maybe two um just
enough to make the weight storage not
not too big of an issue. Um those are
the only two parallelisms that really
make sense. In the past um there was
tensor parallelism which was make
cutting up within an expert but uh the
experts are so small now that that that
is not a profitable optimization.
>> So this goes back to the question does
that mean that frontier labs when
they're doing inference are just
basically within a single scale up?
>> Uh yes. Yeah. I mean you can look at how
it depends on model size. um like you
could have a very large model like um
like one that exceeds the memory of a
rack um and and and there you should be
doing a bit of pipelining um maybe maybe
it's extremely sparse for example and
that would be a reason to do it
>> um so I guess this goes back to the
question about uh or this goes back to
the promise at the beginning of the
lecture which was this will actually
tell you about AI progress as well um to
the extent it is the case that model
size scaling has been slow until
recently
Because
let me make sure I understand the claim.
The claim would not be you could have
trained across more more racks. It was
just that it would not have made sense
before like we didn't have the ability
to do inference for a bigger model
easily.
>> Actually I make the so pipelining
doesn't help with context length. It
totally helps with model size. And so um
because of the ability to do pipelining
uh
at least a rack should not be a
constraint on your ability to fit the
model parameters. I guess the other
consideration you're asking like why
hasn't it scaled up more and why did
bigger scale up domains help.
>> Um so we we talked through one aspect of
that which is um we kind of said it it's
not because of memory capacity. We we
have a solution to the memory capacity
at least with respect to model size.
Yeah. Not not with respect to um uh KV
cache size but at least with respect to
model size we have a solution to memory
capacity. Um the other issue that shows
up is uh latency.
>> I was just about to ask so what is the
going from rack to rack? What is the
latency cost per per hop?
>> This is very much dependent on the
hardware. Um it's
I would uh I can't say with a lot of
authority. I think it's probably on the
order of a few milliseconds, but it
could be off by an order. There
>> is four a realistic number of how many
pipelining stages you might have?
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Okay. So that's that's not
>> it's not on a small number of pipelining
stages. This is not a huge um uh latency
impact.
>> Wait, I guess it's 10 milliseconds per
token.
>> That's right.
>> Two * 4ish
or I don't know how many you said, but
>> yeah. Yeah. 10 millions per token is
actually a lot.
>> Yeah. If it if it goes from 20 to 30,
right? Or something like that. Yeah. Um
this is so like just to to chart the
path that it goes through. Um here
you're going from your from your GPU or
TPU or whatever um to a network card um
uh which then goes to like a top rack
switch um
and then hops over to the other rack and
does the same uh same thing in reverse.
So you sort of have to sum up the
latencies of these different things. Um
>> so this is the same thing as the DC
the it may in fact go up to a des switch
and back. Um depends on deployment
configuration.
>> Got it. Yeah. And because it's um decode
in sequential it's also not the like
they stack up across the stages. You
can't do them at the same time.
>> That's right. Yeah.
>> Okay. So I I guess this brings us back
to the question then. Is the size the
scale up at all relevant to why AI model
sizes or whatever have been what they
have been over the last few years
whether whether whether through training
or through infrance.
>> Yeah. So I mean we talked about latency
of the hop um of the of this hop. Um
there is also just the the same tm
latency the memory time latency is
actually substantially like massively
improved by larger scale of domains. So
um I'll I'll recall TMM down here. um tm
for the weights. Uh
t mm of weights. Um
this was equal to the number of total
parameters
divided by the memory bandwidth.
Which memory bandwidth are we talking
about here? Is it just one GPU or it's
it's it's in fact it it is the number of
GPUs that I can use in parallel to to
load these weights. So, um I can't use
different pipeline stages in parallel
because they they're not running at the
same time, but I can use all the GPUs in
my scaleup domain in parallel to load
the weights.
>> And so, um this is actually extremely
effective. Um so, uh basically I end up
with a term here. This this memory
bandwidth term itself is equal to um
like scale up size
>> times memory bandwidth per GPU.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Times GPU bandwidth. Um uh
and so this term doesn't increase a lot.
It maybe increases 1.5 or 2x per
generation. But this one increased by
like a factor of eight um from from
>> so so the reason the bigger scale up
matter is not the memory capacity of the
whole scale scale up but really the
memory bandwidth.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Pipelining totally solves
the capacity problem, but um but uh uh
scale up size helps solve the bandwidth
problem
>> and the bandwidth problem helps you do
longer context lengths which is more and
more relevant as these models get more
agentic.
>> Yeah, it lets you just run the model at
lower latency um uh as a first thing
like if I just do a very fast model and
it's on like a little like H100 box.
Yeah.
>> Um uh the latency will be really high.
>> Yeah. Okay. a super tangential question.
There's chinchilla scaling which tells
you how how big should a model be
relative to the amount of data you're
going to train it on. Um
but now obviously you're not just trying
to optimize for the highest quality
model you can get with training compute.
You want the best results a user can get
with a mixture of training and inference
compute. Mhm.
>> So then there's a question of how much
should you overtrain a model
>> such that that compute amortized over
training and inference is minimized to
get a certain performance. But now with
RL inference there's or RL there's
another consideration which is you're
going to do some amount of pre-training
that pre-training will be used both for
RL generation
>> and then for inference for the final
user. And by overtraining here I mean
while it would have been more efficient
just from a training computer
perspective to have a bigger model
>> that you train for less time because it
can learn faster maybe you you get a
smaller model you spend more computing
it than you otherwise would have but now
it's cheaper to give it to users like
basically okay maybe but let me question
more concrete how much more than
chinchilla optimal are models
overtrained
>> and has that changed as a result of our
generation
>> this is a place where we have to do a
bit of guess work because like the um
the updated scaling laws and and the use
and model traffics are not reported and
so we have to guess there. Um but uh one
way to look at it um
let me first just make a sort of a
general huristic claim if I am if I have
some like cost and I've got a total cost
which is a sum of like cost A and cost B
like maybe this is the training cost and
this is the inference cost. Yeah. Um and
so I want to minimize this sum
for many uh for many curves that tend up
being the case. The minimum tends to be
where these are where the costs are
equalized. Um that's something of a
heristic claim, but uh you can you can
it tends like there are many examples
where it's true like uh where one is one
overx and the other one is is x for
example. Um they tend to be minimized at
at the point where uh they equal each
other. Um it's also true for like um e
to the x and like e to the minus x and
all kinds of other things. Um uh like so
basically I've got some I've got some
curve that's going down, some other
curve that's going up and they tend to
be minimized at this equal point. Um
huristically I will conjecture that that
is true um for the setup you described
as well. um uh like actually showing
that that would be true would require
looking at the scaling laws and um and
like fitting these like weird exponents.
Um but but things that do follow power
laws tend to tend to have this property.
So I'll just make that claim and move
on. Um so we're going to say that the uh
cost of training
um plus the cost of inference um we want
to equalize these um
uh we'll do pre-training only first
because it's a little well actually we
can do all of it in general. So so
actually we'll we'll cost it as um cost
of pre-training. So number of uh so
number of number of active params
um times the data on pre-training.
So that's the cost of pre-training.
There's a factor of six out here which
is the number of flops. Um there's the
famous 6 ND formula. Um and then in in
RL we have approximately the same thing.
We've got like same number of active
parameters. Um but now it's uh the
amount of data is the RL data. Um
there's this extra like efficiency
multiplier which is um or inefficiency
like the um the inefficiency um
uh
>> which is the fact that you're not
training on all your rollouts.
>> Well, yeah, there there's that. Um and
then the other perhaps even bigger
inefficiency is that
um this involves a substantial amount of
decode and often decode runs at uh less
MFU than than than training.
>> Okay. So if you're doing a backward pass
on every single generation in RL it
would be six ND.
>> Yeah. So this could be a smaller number,
right? Like this could be somewhere. So
um
>> it would at least be two somewhere in
the range of two to six. So we'll just
like we'll say somewhere in the range of
two to six and leave it at that.
>> Yeah. uh um and then and then we can add
in the inference cost. Um the inference
cost is two um number of active uh times
the data in inference.
It's right I think the way I said it was
super gable. So for just for the
audience maybe
forward plus backwards per parameter is
six.
>> Forward alone is two. That's why RL
where you might you're definitely going
to generate all the trajectories but you
might or might not train on all the
trajectories is two to six. Yes. Yeah.
Thank you. Um and then inference is is
is just two.
>> Yeah.
>> So we're going to solve for essentially
maybe equality of all three of these
terms that is ballpark where people are
going to be like
>> uh labs have more information on on what
is productive in doing more RL for
example than versus doing more
pre-training. I don't have that
information but I think a good ballpark
is 30 30 like uh 33% split between each
of them.
>> Actually I'm not sure I understand the
intuition for that. Um,
another naive model could have been that
RL plus pre-training would be 50%. Any
inference would be 50%.
>> Yeah, that that's also a valid uh answer
as well. The because this is heristic, I
can't really argue for one versus the
other. They don't differ by that much
like 33 versus 25 is is only a small
fac.
>> Um,
[snorts]
uh, so let's pick one of them. Uh, all
equal seems uh simple enough. Um
um and so we're just going to solve for
equality of them. It's pretty
straightforward. We can immediately see
that the number of activated parameters
totally disappears. And so let's factor
that out. And we're going to just say
that uh data in pre-training
I decided to do it your way. It's a
little bit nicer actually. So data in
pre-training plus um this uh oh I didn't
have the inefficiency over here either.
um inefficiency um data in pre-training
plus um some multiple of like alpha
times the data in RL
is just going to be and end up equal to
the um some sum of beta times the uh
data in inference. Um
so uh and then let's just like roughly
size the alpha. This this this alpha
it's going to be um
uh this is like the it's maybe somewhere
in the range of 2 to 6 uh 2 to 6 over 6
um from this term compared to this term.
Um and then we've got an inefficiency
term which uh I would say is maybe in
the range of like 30% or something like
that. Um so uh so so this alpha is going
to be something like um 1 and 10 1 / 10
say um and this beta here is is actually
the same. It's it's a third it's 1/3* 33
30%. So it's also um equals 1 in 10
something like that.
If if both of them are one and 10 that
kind of implies that there's never a
backward pass on RL.
>> Yeah. Okay. We can make this like two
and 10. Make it a bit bigger. Yeah. So
yeah, like just write it out once more
like this is two 2 over 10, this is 1
over 10. Um, so the number of inference
tokens you have and this is just a
function of like I've got hundreds of
millions of tokens per second um times
my model is deployed for I don't know
two months before I shift shift to the
next version. um that should determine
the um the number of uh tokens in in RL
and pre pre-training and then I guess we
didn't do the equivalence between
pre-training and and RL so we'll do that
here data pre-training should be equal
to like 2 over 10 * data in RL for them
to be cost equivalent um so
sorry this one over I got it backwards
uh like we pay more cost when it's
inefficient so it's this needs to be one
over. Um
uh um so this tracing this back uh back
forward
>> um this this thing ends up actually
being as written here it's like yeah so
this is like 1.5 and this is one um
>> um
>> billions of dollars worth of compute
just flow the other direction.
>> Yeah. Right. Right. [laughter]
>> I think like if you do it with a
spreadsheet and like actually out you
might notice when the money is going
down the drain. Yeah. Yeah. Um so uh
yeah so I think this yeah all of these
end up being close in as modeled here.
This 30% may have been a little bit too
generous. Um so let's say something like
1.5 here and and leave this as a one
here. So I think it like at this point
you can almost read it off like the
number of inference tokens should be
about the same as the number of
pre-training tokens should be about the
same as the number of RL tokens um
within like factors that we're not able
to reason about. But then so it looks
sorry I'm making a basic altruistic it
sounds seems like there should be less
RL tokens than pre-training tokens and
>> yes that's in general right because RL
is less efficient um in terms of machine
time and so uh you
um if you're trying to equalize the RL
and and pre-training time then then you
should have fewer tokens in order to
have the same wall time that this is all
quite interesting that um I never
thought about it in terms of how much
equalizing in terms of data I I I I mean
I think starting with equalizing and
cost is right but uh depending on how
you model the cost this comes close to
equalizing in data
>> that if every single user who uses
basically if you for GBT to be trained
optimally every single user who uses
GPD5 the total amount of tokens that
they stream should equal the amount
total amount that have gone into
pre-training.
>> Yeah.
>> And the total amount of tokens that got
into pre-training is the sum of all
human knowledge. So like each model
should generate the sum of human
knowledge on the output that it gets on
the input.
>> Yeah. So I mean which way are people
going to error? Like uh if you think
that people's power of prediction is not
perfect and and also um you run the risk
that your um that you make a model that
is not a frontier model and then you
just throw it away. um then then like
that kind of changes the cost trade-off
because there's some like probability
that applies to the inference and you
should derate the inference tokens by
some amount
>> right
>> and then can we back out how much more
yeah compute than chinchilla optimal for
a given sized
>> model
>> so I think we just have to make some
real world assumptions here in order to
do that so um so the inference tokens we
should totally be able to catch right
like so um let's say a 200 million I
don't know maybe it's like uh 500
million tokens a second now I don't
really know um 500 million tokens a
second times a model is deployed for 2
months before it becomes obsolete I
don't really know um
uh I can't do this in my head can you
computer um
uh 2.6 * 10 15th
>> Okay 2.6 6 uh * 10 15. Okay. Um
um this number is probably too large.
This um because this is going to be
multiple models in a family. We So let's
let's make it like
five times smaller or 10 times smaller
or something like that. Um uh okay. So
we're estimating maybe 50 million tokens
per second per per specific model. The
model is live for two months. Um and so
uh this comes out to around 200 uh
trillion tokens. Um and then we want to
compare that to active parameters on a
um frontier model. I don't actually know
the latest rumors but um some
do do you know?
>> Somebody told me 150 trillion
>> active cramps.
>> So sorry I meant tokens
>> trained on 150 trillion tokens.
Interesting.
>> Which which is similar.
>> Yeah. Yeah. That's actually similar. So
um so data on pre-training
>> this is not but well cited but
>> you want me to not remove this um
>> and I think often active prams uh number
of active prams could be in the range of
like uh 100 billion something like that
maybe maybe a bit larger um uh so I'm
assuming active pram of about 100
billion and so multiply by 20 to get the
chinchilla uh token count so chinchilla
d chinchilla would be around uh two
trillion
and yeah and we see like we're at 100
times larger than uh than that
>> actually what does the chinchilla
actually mean [snorts]
>> like the token count for pre-training
for um that the chinchilla scaling law
would recommend I guess um
>> oh I see so how much is it overtrained
>> got it
>> so yeah like the ratio of this 200
trillion or 100 trillion parameters over
uh over the like the tential optimal of
of two trillion And that's the amount
it's overtrained which is like effective
100 overt trained perhaps that's what
okay so if you consider this right here
to the extent this is in the right
ballpark just by thinking about okay you
kind of want everything to be equal in
terms of compute um here's if if that
openi also realizes that and they're
serving a certain amount of tokens per
second that tells you how much data went
into the pre-training of GBD5
>> it even if it's like 50% off or
something that is that is sort of wild
that you can sort of first principles,
>> these kinds of numbers.
>> This is also I mean this is why you
should just like approximate everywhere
because like there's so big error bars
on this but yeah know it's kind of like
empowering to just like set a equal to b
and figure it out.
>> Yeah. Yeah. That's super cool.
>> Okay. So um it is weird of trying to
deduce things. We can publicly look up
the prices of the APIs of these models
and um maybe you can learn something
from that. Uh first with a longer
context um [clears throat]
Gemini 3.1 is
um 50% more expensive if you go over
200k tokens than if you're below 200k
tokens.
I mean
at a high level I understand why that
might that be but why specifically 50%.
>> Yeah. Um so I mean why specifically 50%.
Let's let's sort of um so so the high
level uh even in the first place is um
>> there is some amount of uh increasing
cost with with context length.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and
>> and uh we can bring that back up. That
was the um the the memory time versus
the compute time. So um okay so we we've
put up these same equations from before
of the the time for memory fetches which
is the weights and and the KB cache. um
and then the the time for the compute
which is just the uh matrix
multiplications for the weights.
I I will also draw the um the cost
curve.
Um but this time I'll do it as a
function of context length instead of as
a function of patch size. Um so this is
time over uh yeah just just time. Uh so
this is the cost curve as a function of
context length. Um
we'll draw the compute. Um the the the
cost of the compute is actually constant
as a function of context length. There's
no dependence here on context length. In
reality, there is some dependence, but
it is very mild dependence, so we'll
ignore it. Um so this is the um time for
the compute
this one. Uh and then we'll also draw
the dependence uh of the memory fetch on
on context length. And this starts at a
large number for the weights and then
grows gradually with um with the context
length. So uh maybe here um and then
grow gradually with context length.
And so you take the maximum and you see
there is this inflection point here. So
now so this is the costs that uh that
that for example Gemini might be paying.
Um and then you think how how how might
you put a pricing structure on top of
that? um you would like to ensure that
no matter what the context length is,
you are you are still profitable. So
>> interesting.
>> And so we've got a two-tier pricing
structure, maybe we've got something
that looks like this up to some context.
>> That's fascinating.
>> So I think it says something about um
given that the bump is at 200k, it
probably means that this is somewhat
aligned with this crossover point. Maybe
not exactly aligned with
>> fascinating. Um so we can actually
probably even complete that calculation
just to see where it lands out. Um we
can solve for the number of bytes per
token. Um if if if we sort of make some
assumptions about the number of active
parameters. So solving for the number of
bytes per token. Um we're going to
assume like the the point where we
equalize um the time of memory and the
time of compute is at let's say 200k
tokens. Um so we equalize these two. Um
we're also going to just uh assume that
the batch size is large enough that the
um the memory time spent on weights is
is negligible. So we'll forget about
this and we'll focus on the actual
memory time spent on KB cache. So
that ends up saying copying this term
over batch times len context um times uh
bytes
token
um over me bandwidth
is going to be equal to uh number of
activated prams
over flops.
And then we're going to solve for bytes
per token. Um
size was missing here.
Shows up here and then it cancels out by
the time we get to here.
and uh and I I dropped the len context
>> so we can plug in numbers. This number
this is this is this well is the
reciprocal of the number that we saw
before. It's yeah this is like one over
300 um which is reasonably stable across
many um different hardware platforms.
We conjecturally said that maybe number
of activated tokens is like 100 billion
and length of the context we said was
200k. Um
something is wrong here. The length of
the context should be on the denominator
not the numerator. Um
Um
1667 like about one one kil almost 2
kilobyte. That's that is plausible
actually. Um so we said around 2
kilobytes. Um
so um so let's just do a a sanity check
for this um for what this could be. Um
there are two mechanisms that people do
uh attention with a small number of
bytes per token. Um one is uh dense
attention with a lot of reuse across
layers. Um so character AI has a blog
post talking about that alternating long
and short context. Um and like in the
character AI kind of model which also
showed up in the Gemma models the global
context which is really what we're
talking about here global context um was
shared across all the layers. And so to
get this 2 kilobytes, you could get that
for example as um a d head of 128 um is
is typical. Um and then like the number
of bytes is typically
um number of attention layers um uh
times
2 * d head uh times
uh number of uh q heads.
So um this is the number of unique
contexts per layer. Do you do you share
the the context across many layers or do
you use it only once? Um uh so in
character AI like models uh this number
is one. Um we said this is 100 128. Um
and uh this is a choice which typically
ranges from one uh sorry this is KV
heads I meant. Um
>> so there is written a head and a KV
head. is that
>> the KV heads are the heads that are
stored in memory like store the contents
of the previous tokens. The Q heads are
the um the retrieval heads. They're
they're only used temporarily and
they're they're used by the attending
token. So um in this auto reggressive
context, I've got KV heads associated
with all of the context and then Q heads
associated with this new token here. But
but but this head the 128.
>> Oh uh this is um this this number is
actually the same for oh so this d head
is the dimension of the vector.
>> Ah yeah uh and number of kv heads is
typically in the range of 1 to 8.
>> So um like it is totally plausible to
get this by for example having eight KV
heads and and a d head of 128. That
gives you exactly this number
>> or or you could have like fewer KB heads
but more layers. Interesting.
>> Yeah. Um, so this is one way to get
there via dense attention. There's also
a way to get there via sparse attention
where you um increase all of these
numbers, but then you have like a run
over sparity term.
>> So yeah, I mean I I think this number is
plausible if if maybe a little bit
small.
>> It's funny that they would leak so much
information through their API pricing.
>> I mean you are incentivized to price
close to your costs because otherwise
someone could script you.
>> Maybe we can learn something about the
difference in input versus output
prices. Yeah.
>> And what that tells us about decode
versus pre-filled in these models. Um,
and I think last I checked it's like 50%
more expensive or something like that or
>> I I don't remember. What I've seen in
the past is like three or five times
more sense. Let's say it's five times
more expensive. Okay. This is the
compute to process the next token in
decode. Suppose you're doing prefill.
You're not just processing the most
recent token. You're processing all the
tokens in parallel.
So I want to say
that it would be this times len
um len prefill length of a pass in
general.
>> Yeah. If we say like if we can think of
decod as being a pass with one and then
prefill being a pass with many.
>> Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Um so maybe like
prefix. Sure. Whatever.
>> Um okay. Memory. So you're not storing
the KV cache if you're for the tokens
that are the prefill tokens.
I think maybe maybe sort of let's draw
actually how prefill shows up here. Um
uh if I may clarify uh so we do a bit of
decode like this. Um
>> we may actually come back and do more
prefill like like if you think this is a
chat session the user says something the
AI generates the response and then the
user says something else and we prefill
this. So like maybe this is the more
common like this is the general case
rather than this. In fact, this is like
you read a file or something.
>> Read a file or just like the AI is
responding to a user input or tool call
or anything that's not generated.
>> Yep. Okay. Okay. So, suppose we're here.
So,
you will need to load
basically
the you will have calculated all of this
previously.
>> Mhm.
>> So, just the KV of everything that came
before.
But what is the memory cost of this?
Well,
memory bandwidth cost of this if you're
doing flash attention, it would Yeah,
it's it's basically temporary. It it it
doesn't even go to main memory. Just
ignore it.
>> Okay. So, then it would just be
everything that came before. So, is it
not just that then?
>> Yeah, there's actually no adjustment at
all to the memory time.
>> Great. Oh, so it's a very trivial
change. Yeah. To accommodate. So
this term is making it 5x more
expensive. Now why would that be? Or
what does that tell us about
what what are we trying to learn here?
What does that actually tell us? What
what variable does this help us clamp?
Um
well the compute has presumably gotten
five like the only thing that could have
changed the comput 5x more expensive as
a result. So so yeah this is the time
for one pass but actually the amount of
tokens is that that much larger. So I
guess we want the cost per token in fact
or the time per token.
>> So I'm not sure I understood the this is
this is for processing the next token in
prefix.
>> Uh well actually for processing the
entire batch um so in this like at this
cost we have processed this many tokens
like let it prefilled.
>> Yeah. Um or I guess pre Yeah. Like the
of the pass like yeah not not this
prefix but it's this cost.
>> Okay. So let's just change as a pass
we can. So this is 5x more expensive.
>> Um input is 5 5x more expensive.
>> No output is more expensive.
>> Output is 5x more expensive.
>> So the the result we want to work
towards is that prefill is compute
limited and decode is um memory
bandwidth limited.
>> Why don't we do this? Why don't we have
Why don't we just chart it with like len
pass on the x- axis?
>> Yep.
>> T on T on the Y ais.
>> T we want the cost per token. So it'll
be T over some stuff. T over length of
the pass.
>> Mhm.
Yeah, that'll be right.
Okay. So
okay
confused about this len pass is the
it seems like this should be higher when
you're doing prefill.
>> Prefill has a bigger length pass. Yeah.
Right.
>> But then why is it cheaper?
>> Why is it cost higher? Yeah. Yeah. Um,
so I mean we're gonna it's this division
by length pass that that actually makes
it all uh so okay this is going to
divide out. This is going to divide out
but then we're going to get a divi all
of this is going to divide by length of
pass and it's going to make the memory
cost cheaper.
>> Okay. Yeah, let me let me think about
this then. Okay. So let's do one line
for
basically we'll have four different
lines. Um let's do the
let's do prefill first. And so
actually let's let's do decode first.
>> Oh. Oh. So actually I will length length
of the pass when it's one that is
decode. When it is bigger that is
prefix.
>> Okay. I see. I see. I see. That makes
sense. Okay. Getting back to it. So tmp
compute if you have um basically just
this divided by length pass is just this
amount. So this actually does not vary
based on
>> t. So it'll just be some flat value
like this.
Um and this is
t compute
and then th this is like
uh this is
>> that's decode decode, right? Um now tm
we have this whole thing divided by len
pass. Well, it doesn't really matter
what's up there. It'll just be something
that looks like this.
Right. Yeah. Say this is T
me.
This is decode again.
So
as
the length of the prefix goes up or pass
your memory bandwidth time declines.
And that means that to the extent that
you were me bottlenecked on memory
bandwidth before you can avoid being
bottlenecked on memory bandwidth. The
fact that they are charging 5x less for
prefill than decode does suggest that
they are bottlenecked on memory
bandwidth to quite a degree such that
for them at least because t is
equivalent to cost right it's the cost
of renting a computer. This is actually
like this this would be at one and this
would be at five. That's right. That's
right. Yeah. So it it is in fact
tremendously memory bandwidth bottom.
The real graph looks something like the
real graph looks something like
like that.
>> Yeah. I mean it still crosses but
>> yeah exactly. So yeah let me do it this
way.
>> Yeah that's right.
Um
and then the this is the gap on decode
between the memory and the compute time.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Okay. Interesting. Another interesting
one would be why cachets are so much
cheaper.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> So I think if I remember correctly,
cachets are like 10x. It's more
expensive to write to cache according to
the pricing on all these models, but if
you do hit a cache, it's 10x cheaper.
So, what is going on with
presumably this is the cost of keeping
something in HBM rather than just
evacuating it. But if you do keep it in
HBM, then it's cheaper to load again,
>> right? So there's two ways you can
produce um tokens uh or the the KV cache
for a token. Um you can just produce it
from scratch by computing it from the
underlying like token ids which are
tiny. Um
or you can um previously have produced
it and stored it in memory somewhere.
>> Uh so the cost ratio is really talking
about the ratio between those two
mechanisms of producing it. A cache miss
means you've deleted it from all your
memories and you have to recmp compute
it from the tokens directly.
>> In fact, you can maybe even take that a
step further and think about which
memory tier do you store it in. So you
could store it in HPM. Um there are
other slower and cheaper memories than
HPM like DDR on your host or flash um as
well. And so one of the things you can
do is a is a calculation of um where it
makes sense to be in each memory tier.
Um and this is related to um how long
you're going to store for. So so we want
to look at the cost of storage in in a
few different memory tiers and also the
cost of rematerialization. So um uh
remat means the cost to rematerial like
rebuild all of the KB cache from scratch
having it after you deleted it. So we
rematerialize it. Um and so basically
this is going to cost the uh length of
the context. Um
uh actually we'll look at uh cost per
token so that we don't need to carry
around this length of context
everywhere. So to rematerialize one
token of KV cache um I just need to run
I need to run a forward pass on the
whole model and um and then so this is
going to be the compute time. I have to
rerun the compute um
at whatever speed my GPU does it and
then I multiply it by my like GPU
dollars per second. Um
>> sorry, extremely question. Why is there
not a quadratic term?
>> Yeah. So, uh there is a quadratic term
um in it shows up in the compute um
uh
as an approximation. I chose to remove
it. um the what that I I'll just show
you sort of quickly what that looks
like. It's because so you have the um
if you look at the cost per token um or
the number of flops per token. There is
the flops that are coming from doing the
weight matrix multiplies as a function
of context lengths. Um and then there is
the number of multiplies that comes from
doing the KV cache. Um which is which
goes up linearly with the the amount of
stuff you attend to. um the slope on
this is so low that like when you when
you draw it like this it's like it's
very well approximated by a flat line.
>> So like it starts to like you start to
notice the effect of the quadratic or
the linear term up in the in the
millions of tokens or so. So just not
super relevant.
>> So what is the reason that there's no
company which has over a million token
context length
>> um
>> if this is true.
>> Yeah. So there are two costs of long
context. One is the memory bandwidth
cost which we've spent a lot of time
analyzing. That's this thing. Um and
then the other one is the compute cost.
The compute cost is almost always um and
sort of actually forced by um
fundamental principles uh to be a much
smaller slope than than the memory
bandwidth cost. And so the primary thing
that limits you to have really large
contexts are memory band memory capacity
which is exactly this effect like
>> um and so there's this idea that Daario
said on the podcast and others have said
which is we don't need continual
learning for AGI in context learning is
enough and if you believe that then you
have to think that we had to get to 100
million token 100 million billion
context length to have an employee that
is the equivalent to working with you
for a month. Now maybe that's no longer
true as far as attention or something.
Yeah.
>> But um
>> yeah, if you think that then as a some
ML infra thing would have to change to
allow for 100 million like the memory
bandwidth to allow for 100 million
>> token context lengths.
>> I mean sparse attention gives you get
out for sure because you get this um
square root like you know gives you a
big improvement. Um
but I think it's like if you look at the
history of um context lengths of models
um
from like earlier models like GPT3 maybe
to GPD4 I don't remember when the
transition happened exactly like they
shot up from like about 8K to 100K 200K
um and then for the last year or two
they've all been hovering around there.
Um I think that actually indicates that
that that's sort of the reasonably
balanced cost point and going massively
beyond that would be cost prohibitive.
>> Not because of the compute cost because
>> the memory bandwidth cost. Yeah.
>> Um so I actually don't see a very good
path to solving that. Like the memory
the HPM is where is is at where it is.
Uh it's not getting hugely better. And
and why doesn't sparse attention solve
that?
>> The sparse attention is a big
improvement. Um uh maybe that is priced
in already perhaps. Um uh it's not an
infinite improvement because if you go
too sparse, you lose too much quality.
>> Yeah.
>> But yeah, I mean the empirical result is
that uh the context lengths haven't been
increasing that much. Um uh and I think
it's because there is no solution to the
memory wall. Yeah. Interesting.
>> Like so going too sparse just means like
you're attending to a very small subset
of the tokens and the quality will get
worse. Yeah. So what is the cost of of
of these different ways of producing um
uh reynthesizing the KV cache? Computing
it from scratch is based on my GPU time.
I have to do a certain amount of
multiplies in order to um uh of GPU time
that I spend in order to produce it. Um
storing HPM.
Um,
this really goes as my um I think I had
a number here which was the bytes per
token.
Um, so I need to I need to have some
number of bytes per token
and then I need to store this in the uh
HBM. So it's going to use up some of my
HBM capacity.
Uh so a way to think of this is that
like if I have too many of these things
sitting in HBM like if I fill up my HBM
with just KV caches that I'm not using I
can't use that GPU and so how do I price
that? Maybe I say that the cost of it is
proportional to the fraction of the HPM
I'm using. So so there's also times GPU
dollars. Um
uh
um and then let's just do one more
memory tier and say something like uh
DDR um store in DDR instead. Um
uh
the same kind of thing goes up for flash
and and for DDR. Um I put these in the
wrong columns actually. Um I meant to
make two columns.
The the distinction I want to make is
that there is the time to cost to
retrieve
And then there's a uh cost cost to store
um cost to hold hold on.
>> Um um and so this is like there's a cost
per second whereas this is like a
instantaneous cost. Um so
rematerialization has a cost to retrieve
and has zero cost to store it because
we've deleted it. Um
this is the one that I put in the wrong
location. This is this is actually the
cost to to hold on. So I will rewrite
it.
Okay. Um so we have this is the uh like
if we're just storing it in HPM, it has
this sort of cost profile. Um
uh and then if we store in DDR um it's
actually going to take some time. So
it's like we get the same thing here.
Bytes
per token over DDR capacity
times DDR
cost um
a second. Um but but now this has a um a
cost to retrieve that is is higher than
the HPM because we need to copy it into
the HPM. And so this is um bytes per
token
uh over DDR bandwidth um uh bandwidth
uh and then this consumes some amount of
the DDR as well
>> and every scale up has DDR and flash.
>> This is really a deployment question and
so you can choose that. Um Nvidia does
deploy in this form. Uh it has it has
both.
>> Why isn't the [snorts] cost to retrieve
HBM the memory bandwidth or the bytes
divided by memory bandwidth? Yeah, I
mean it depends what what you define a
retrieve to be. Here I'm defining
retrieve to be um uh move it into HPM so
that you can start actually doing
inference on it and so like sort of by
definition
>> and because if it's already in HPM you
can be doing compute while you're
getting it from HPM desk for example.
>> Yeah. Um so so these are three things
and I I guess I ordered them wrong. Um,
in general, if you if you're balancing
two costs and you've got different
memory uh different tiers in the memory
hierarchy, you should expect as as this
cost goes up, this cost should go down.
Um, so you can kind of see where the
zeros are and um like I should have
ordered them. This one first, this one
second, and this one third. So if you're
going to hold on to it for for a very
short amount of time,
>> then the um all of this is like
multiplied by the um hold time.
>> Yeah.
>> This one is and so is this one. Um
and interestingly they have different
prices to write for and is you specify
this in the API for 5 minutes versus an
hour.
>> Yeah. which which suggests that the 5
minutes is HBM and the hour is DDR.
>> I think that's like I think that's a
pretty good assumption. It could if you
look at the numbers it might also turn
out that it's one tier down and it's DDR
versus flash is
>> Yeah. Okay. Interesting. And the price
difference I think was I'll look it up.
Okay. So the um base
uh base input tokens is five per million
tokens basic which means rebat.
>> Yeah, that's five. Um,
>> is this five $5
>> to like
retrieve quote unquote and then the um
to write to um
uh
presumably HBM write for 5 minutes is
6.25.
>> So actually we might actually be able to
determine the um which memory t it is by
um by the durations. Actually, the
duration probably tells it to actually
5 minutes versus 1 hour.
>> Yeah, exactly. I think this will
probably end up being um it's going to
be the drain time of the memory uh tier
that you're in. And so what that means
is like uh like given that I'm I know
I'm going to be holding something for 5
minutes. I would like to
have [snorts] pick a memory that I can
read every 5 minutes like I can read the
whole memory once per 5 minutes
ballpark. Um so that is the drain time
of the memory. So if I take the the like
call or the storage storage capacity
over storage bandwidth
bandwidth um I would like this to be
like equal to 5 minutes or something
like that.
>> Um and so actually we did this
calculation for HPM. For HPM we know
that this number is 20 milliseconds. Um
so HPM is much too short like much too
small. Um DDR
could be about an order of magnitude or
or two off from this. And so this is
probably in the order of like actually I
think it might even be in the in the
seconds like 1 to 10 seconds. Um and
then
this is really I don't have these
numbers memorized but generally as you
go to slower tiers uh flash is plausibly
in the order of 1 minute. Um and then
like spinning disc uh which is massively
different I think is on the order of 1
hour. So this might actually identify
that the tiers are probably flash and
spinning disc. Sorry, why why is this
the calculations the storage cap divided
by the bandwidth?
>> So, um you you've got a bunch of
different memory tiers like we've listed
four of them. Um
>> uh the your choice like your choice of
which memory tier is a like you want to
minimize the cost.
>> Um
>> and so you are like what fraction of the
device are you using? You're using some
fraction of the device for the holding
onto it and then you're using some
fraction of the device to retrieve it.
Um, and so let's say I'm using like 10%
of the device. Um, and and I want to
equalize those two fractions. Uh, that
that's a sign that I've hit the right um
the right thing. So let's say I've got
some runtime here. Like I I'm going to
hold on for all of this time. Um, uh,
and then so this is the time hold uh,
and then there's going to be some amount
of time here which is time to retrieve.
>> Mhm. Uh
and I want I mean basically to equalize
the costs these two costs. Um I want the
retrieval time to be equal to the hold
time
uh
times the like fraction of capacity.
>> Mhm.
>> Um because like this is the the
retrieval time. Uh yeah I mean this is
>> this is how many other things I can hold
simultaneously. Basically just like,
hey, you want to you want to store
things in there for so long such that
the amount of time it's in there is kind
of the time to get all your things in
there and out.
>> Yeah, basically it makes sense.
>> I I think that probably indicates that
this is the two tiers of flash and and
spinning disc. I'm kind of shocked to
see spinning disc being used at all
because it's such an old technology.
Yeah.
>> I mean, it's also crazy that it's so
slow that it takes an hour to load its
full capacity into it and then
>> like it's a really unattractive
technology, but it's useful in some
places.
>> Yeah. So, we're sitting down because I
want to ask you some questions that uh I
guess don't need a blackboard. Um, you
have this extremely interesting blog
post where you talk about how at a high
level the architecture of different
cryptocraphic protocols looks a lot like
neural networks. And there's this
conversion evolution where they both
need to jumble information across all
their inputs. For cryptographic
protocols, it's to make sure that
there's like each new input into a hash
function will totally scramble what
happens. For neural networks, of course,
they need to consider information how
this piece of information changes what
you should make of this other piece of
information. That has a extremely
interesting point. I guess at a high
level that the difference in what
they're trying to do in some sense,
they're trying to do the inverse thing,
right? which is um cryptographic
protocols are trying to take information
which has structure and make it look
indistinguishable from randomness.
>> Yeah.
>> And uh neural networks are trying to
take things which are look like random
protein sequences DNA garble text and
extract higher level structure from it.
So
they have similar highle mechanisms but
they're actually kind of trying to do
the opposite things. Um yeah I wonder
what you make of that.
>> Yeah. Um, so I mean the like the mixing
like I tried to look for other examples
where mixing like scrambling mixing
shows up as well. There's actually
almost even like a physical example
where like you're stirring something,
you're making a cake and you want to
stir the batter and like literally the
idea like first stir it this way and
then stir it this way is like actually
not too bad of an approach. Um, but
beyond that like in back to the digital
world um
there are some differences and the one
you talk uh call out is is a pretty
strong difference. um the way it shows
up um like what makes neural nets uh
like if you just randomly initialize a
neural network actually maybe it's a
reasonable cryptograph like cipher as
well because like the random
initialization is it going to jumble
stuff in a complicated way it may even
like do what you want who knows um uh
the thing that makes it interpretable is
the gradient descent so you can
differentiate a neural network um and
get a meaningful derivative um and we do
a lot of work to
like not over complicate the derivative.
So the residual connection keeps it like
contained and simple. Um and the uh and
so does like the layer norm uh stuff
that we do. Um
one of the biggest attacks against uh
cryptographic ciphers is also to
differentiate the cipher. Um ciphers run
in a different number field. They run in
um uh the field of two elements. So just
binary. Um whereas neural nets run like
in theory in the field of real numbers.
Um uh and so you have to differentiate
with respect to like binary numbers. Um
but you can absolutely differentiate a
cipher and this is called differential
crypt analysis. And uh like basically
what it says is that if you take a small
difference of the input how like uh it's
quite difficult to make uh the
difference of the output be small like
oh like uh the whole job of a of a
well-designed cipher is to make the
difference out very large.
>> Um so I I guess the distinction is that
the the optimization goals at that point
are about complexifying. They they don't
have the same residual connections or um
or like layer norms that that would
>> Yeah. I mean, I I guess a place where
the the two merge is back doors.
>> Um, okay. So, with a back door LLM,
you're trying to hide um
what do you consider an input? It's not
an input into the forward pass, but it's
an input into the backward pass, but
you're trying to hide an input into the
backward pass.
>> Like you're like this is like an
adversarial uh
Yeah. So, yeah. I mean in fact this is
like this is actually a place where you
get exactly the um sort of avalanche
property that ciphers have as well. Um
like adversarial attacks on typically
like image classification models right
are can I find a perturbation of the
image that a very very small
pertabbation of the image that totally
changes the classification totally
changes the output
>> that is the common case in ciphers
whereas it that's the like undesired
case in in neural nets for sure. Yeah.
>> Okay. So I was asking you uh has have
neural networks actually been used for
cryptography and um we realized it might
be better to just do this on the
blackboard.
>> Yeah.
>> Um so I'm curious are they actually
being used for cryptography?
>> Yeah. So using neural nets for
cryptography well in general
cryptography like creating a new cipher
is a very very dangerous proposition.
Like uh almost all of them are broken
like 99% of them are broken. So uh
probably a bad place to start but the
other direction has been very like in in
at least one very clear case quite
productive. Um so there's this
construction in so a construction that
exists in in ciphers and then was
imported into neural nets um called a
fistl cipher fal network. Um so the idea
is that um you you may have some some
some function f uh which is not
invertible. Um
but you like the function because it
like does interesting things like it it
it um it does an MLP for example or or
it mixes it in an interesting way. Um
you'd like to build something out of
this that is invertible. So the
construction we're going to make is
going to actually be a twoinput function
rather than a one input function. um
and we're going to apply uh
f ofx
we need to actually remember what x was.
So we're going to stick x over here so
that we can uh work backwards and then
we also can't drop y. So we're going to
remember y and we're going to add them
together. And so we form this tpple.
So, um, the the way to invert this, like
if you think I have this output and I
want to recover X and Y, well, I can
easily recover X. It's right there. I
just read it off. And then to recover Y,
I like if this thing was called Z, um, I
can I can recover Y by Z minus F of X
because I've already recovered X. So, so
that means that this construction is
invertible.
Um,
this was used in ciphers like a ton. Um,
still is used. It's one of the main uh
mechanisms of constructing ciphers.
Often you want ciphers to be invertible,
especially the layers of ciphers you
want to be invertible um because that
has better cryptographic properties.
This has actually been ported over into
um
into neural nets. Um there's a 2017 18
paper called Rev nets, reversible
networks. Um and what it does is it
actually makes the entire like you can
apply it to any network like a
transformer network. you can make I do a
forwards pass but then I can actually
run the entire pass backwards as well.
Um so the whole neural network is
invertible
um with exactly this construction and so
this paper reversible networks um like
applied to some layer like a transformer
layer for example we've got this
function f which is our transformer
layer um now normally we would have um
just an input and then a residual
connection coming out um and it gets
added like this um over here. Mhm.
>> Um but now, uh the variation of this is
going to be we've got two inputs, X and
Y. Um so we've got X
and Y inputs.
Um X goes through the function gets
added to Y
and then this becomes the new X, the
output X.
And then this x
becomes the output y.
So um really what this is doing this is
like this is actually sort of doing if
you think of two layers uh back this is
actually the thing you mentioned before
it's actually doing the residual
connection from two layers back. Um like
this y came from the previous layer and
was the residual connection there.
>> Um but because of this construction it
the whole thing is invertible.
>> Why do I care? What does invertible
matter for? Um the big thing that it can
be interesting for is for training. Um
if I think of a forward passive training
um so I will let's say I have four
layers I run them in 0123 order um I
have to write all of the um activations
to HBM
>> um and so I get an HPM footprint um here
that is kind of like linear linear in
uh number of layers.
>> Yep.
Um, so this this actually can be uh the
largest memory footprint during
training. Um, and so this is normal
training and then and then I run the
backwards pass and I read it kind of in
reverse like I I run them sort of
forward pass goes forward, backward pass
goes backwards and I have to read them
back out. Um, the idea of this RevNet's
paper is that because it's in invertible
um I don't need to store this at all. I
can completely rematerialize it when I'm
running my backwards pass. So I I run my
forwards pass and then when I'm running
my backwards pass, I'm simultaneously in
lock step undoing all of the forwards
pass steps that I did in order to um uh
to have the activations that I need
here. So this ends up being a memory
saving, which is a nice idea.
>> Interesting. And in in some sense,
you're spending more compute to save
memory.
>> That's right. Yeah.
>> Interesting.
>> Huh. Actually, it's kind of the opposite
of what you're doing with the KV cache.
In the KV cache,
>> you're spending more memory to save
compute.
>> Yeah. Uh, spending more memory to save
computers is generally profitable given
where yeah, hardware are today.
>> Yeah. Interesting. Cool. Uh, that was
super fun, right? Thank you so much for
doing it. I I feel like it really
vindicated the vision behind the studio
and and the blackboard.
>> Cool. Thanks so much for doing it.
>> Thanks.